[Docs] Add supported models & introduction pages (#1839)
openvinotoolkit/openvino.genai: site/docs/getting-started/introduction.mdx

---

# Introduction to OpenVINO GenAI

## What is OpenVINO GenAI?

> OpenVINO™ GenAI is a library of the most popular Generative AI model pipelines, optimized execution methods, and samples that run on top of highly performant [OpenVINO Runtime](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenVINO™ GenAI is a library of the most popular Generative AI model pipelines, optimized execution methods, and samples that run on top of highly performant [OpenVINO Runtime](https://docs.openvino.ai/).
```
Docs should point to docs

- **🚀 Performance Optimization:** Hardware-specific optimizations for CPU, GPU, and NPU devices.
- **👨‍💻 Programming Language Support:** Comprehensive APIs in both Python and C++.
- **🗜️ Model Compression:** Support for 8-bit and 4-bit weight compression, including embedding layers.
- **🎓 Advanced Inference Capabilities:** In-place KV-cache, dynamic quantization, speculative sampling, and more.
- **🎨 Wide Model Compatibility:** Support for popular models including Llama, Mistral, Phi, Qwen, Stable Diffusion, Flux, Whisper, and others. Refer to the [Supported Models](/docs/supported-models) for more details.

## Workflow Overview

Using OpenVINO GenAI typically involves three main steps:

1. **Model Preparation:**
    - Convert model from other frameworks to the OpenVINO IR format (e.g. using `optimum-intel`), optionally applying weights compression.
    - Download pre-converted model in OpenVINO IR format (e.g. from [OpenVINO Toolkit](https://huggingface.co/OpenVINO) organization on Hugging Face).
    :::info

    You can use models from [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) and [ModelScope](https://modelscope.cn/home)

    :::

> 2. **Pipeline Setup:** Initialize the appropriate pipeline for your task (LLM, Text to Image, Whisper, VLM, etc.) with the converted model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Pipeline Setup:** Initialize the appropriate pipeline for your task (`LLMPipeline`, `Text2ImagePipeline`, `WhisperPipeline`, `VLMPipeline`, etc.) with the converted model.
```
You've already listed use cases earlier. Repeating the same may be annoying. Luckily actual class names are aligned with the use cases, so they can be used instead.

3. **Inference:** Run the model with your inputs using the pipeline's simple API.

![OpenVINO GenAI Workflow](/img/openvino-genai-workflow.svg)

## Comparison with Alternatives

Unlike base OpenVINO, which requires manual implementation of generation loops, tokenization, scheduling etc., OpenVINO GenAI provides these components in a ready-to-use package.

Compared to Hugging Face Optimum Intel, OpenVINO GenAI offers a smaller footprint, fewer dependencies, and better performance optimization options, particularly for C++ applications.

| Feature | OpenVINO GenAI | Base OpenVINO | Hugging Face Optimum Intel |
|-|-|-|-|
| Easy-to-use APIs | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Low footprint | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| C++ support | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| Pre-built pipelines | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Model variety | Medium | High | High |

## System Requirements

> Refer to the [OpenVINO System Requirements](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/about-openvino/release-notes-openvino/system-requirements.html) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GenAI system requirements match [OpenVINO requirements](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/about-openvino/release-notes-openvino/system-requirements.html) because OpenVINO is the only GenAI's runtime dependency.
```
I think we should explain why the link points away from genai docs.

Author: Explanation added:
```
## System Requirements

OpenVINO GenAI is built on top of OpenVINO Runtime and shares the same system requirements.

Refer to the [OpenVINO System Requirements](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/about-openvino/release-notes-openvino/system-requirements.html) for more details.
```
